---
layout: post
title: "Akademos installation guide"
subtitle: "A minimalist theme for writers and coders"
author: "Protesilaos Stavrou"
permalink: /guide/
---
**Do not follow these instructions.** Jekyll 3.2 still does not support the inclusion of `_data` files, which are necessary to properly run this theme. Expect an update some time towards the end of 2016.
{: .critical }

*Akademos* is a theme for websites built with Jekyll, the static site generator. This document provides information on the installation process and relevant configuration options.

{% capture config_options %}
 [Page subtitle](#page-subtitle)
2. [Date format](#date-format)
3. [Post author](#post-author)
4. [GitHub Flavoured Markdown (GFM)](#github-flavoured-markdown-gfm)
5. [Syntax highlighting](#syntax-highlighting)
6. [Social menu links](#social-menu-links)
7. [Menu items](#menu-items)
8. [Google analytics](#google-analytics)
{% endcapture %}

Sections:

- [Install the Akademos Ruby gem](#install-the-akademos-ruby-gem)
- [Akademos defaults](#akademos-defaults)
- [Choosing a colour scheme](#choosing-a-colour-scheme)
- [Configurations and options](#configurations-and-options)
  1. {{ config_options }}
- [Summary of configurations](#summary-of-configurations)
- [Homepage structure](#homepage-structure)
- [Contributions and requests](#contributions-and-requests)
- [License](#license)

## Installing the Akademos Ruby gem

To follow these instructions, you will need (i) a basic Jekyll scaffold running on version 3.2 or higher, and (ii) access to the command line or terminal app.

Include this line in your site's Gemfile:

```ruby
gem "akademos"
```

Then add this to your `_config.yml`:

```yaml
theme: akademos
```

Once both are in place, use the command line to execute:

```
bundle
```
Or install it yourself with:

```
gem install akademos
```

## Akademos defaults

The gem includes, among others, a `_data` directory that has the `akademos.yml` file. This sets the default configurations for the theme. Options include:

```yml
style: alto-light           # Global colour scheme
authorship: true            # Show author name if 'true'
social: true                # Show social media icons if 'true'
analytics: UA-XXXXXXXX-X    # Google Analytics ID
```

To set your defaults, you will need to create a `_data` directory at your site's root folder, if you do not have it already, and add an `akademos.yml` file inside of it. You will require this file in order to override or expand upon the prepackaged options. Instructions on the specifics are presented in the following sections of this guide.

In case you are not sure about where the `_data` directory should be, here is a sample of a website's directory structure:

```
your-site.com
├── _config.yml
├── _posts
|   ├── 2016-06-21-example-title.md
|   └── 2016-06-22-second-example-title.md
├── _layouts
|   ├── default.html
|   └── post.html
|   └── page.html
├── _data
|   └── akademos.yml
└── index.html
```

You will not be able to customise Akademos if you do not create the `_data` directory and add `akademos.yml` in it. The theme will work regardless, though only rely on the predefined configurations.
{: .warn }

## Choosing a colour scheme

Akademos comes with an option to change the website's colours.[^Prot16Note] This alters everything, from the backgrounds to the text, the links, the syntax highlighting.

Here are all the styles, presented as [Proper name] - [Code value]:

{% assign themes = site.data.akademos-themes | sort: 'name' %}

<ul>
{% for theme in themes %}
  <li>{{ theme.name }} - <code>{{ theme.url }}</code></li>
{% endfor %}
</ul>

Visit the [demo page](/akademos/demo-colours/) to see what each style is about.
{: .info }

To use one of these, you will need to specify the code value in your new `akademos.yml` file (under `_data`) using the key `style`.

Example:

```yaml
style: flowerbed-dark
```

If you do not add anything or if your input is incorrect (e.g. a typo), Akademos will use the default colour scheme, which is Alto light (`alto-light`).

## Configurations and options

This section covers the underlying assumptions and various options of Akademos. Contents include:

1. {{ config_options }}

### 1. Page subtitle

To use a subtitle, just like in this article, you will need to include the `subtitle` key in your post's YAML front matter.

Here is an example:

```
---
title: "Akademos installation guide"
subtitle: "A minimalist theme for writers and coders"
layout: post
---
```

This will work for files that have values `post` or `page` for their `layout key`.

### 2. Date format

Dates in posts can be displayed using your format of choice. This is typically defined in your `_config.yml` file as a global variable with the key `date_format`.

In case it is not specified, Akademos will default to a [Month] [Day] [Year] format.

If you want to set your custom date format, here are some examples. Just pick the line of your preference:

```yaml
date_format: "%A, %B %d, %Y"    # Wednesday, June 15, 2016
date_format: "%d %B %Y"         # 15 June 2016
date_format: "%A %d %B, %Y"     # Wednesday 15 June 2016
date_format: "%Y-%m-%d"         # 2016-06-15
```

For more customisation options, see Liquid's documentation regarding [date formats](https://help.shopify.com/themes/liquid/filters/additional-filters#date).

### 3. Post author

The first requirement to displaying post author information (below the article title and next to the date) is to explicitly enable it in your new `akademos.yml` file (under `_data`).

Add this line:

```yml
authorship: true
```

Once that is in place, the theme will use the name of the author specified in the post's front matter. You would need to use the `author` key. Here is an example:

```
---
title: "Akademos: installation guide and important information"
subtitle: "Akademos is a minimalist theme for writers and coders"
author: "Protesilaos Stavrou"
---
```

If that is not available, Akademos will search for a site author, as specified in the `_config.yml` file (also using the `author` key). If that is not available, it will not display any such information.

### 4. GitHub Flavoured Markdown (GFM)

It is not mandatory that you use GFM, but it is recommended if you intend to implement fenced blocks for highlighting code. Fenced blocks look like this:

```
  ```
  Your code goes here
  Specify language for highlighting after the opening three backticks.
  Leave the opening and closing backticks on their own line.
  ```
```

To learn more about GFM, see [their own guide](https://guides.github.com/features/mastering-markdown/).

### 5. Syntax highlighting

Akademos is tested with the *Kramdown* interpreter and the *Rouge* highlighter. In other words, it is meant to work on GitHub Pages.

Below are the settings. You may include them in your `_config.yml` file.

```yaml
# Build settings
markdown: kramdown
kramdown:
  input: GFM
  syntax_highlighting: rouge
highlighter: rouge
```

Just copy/paste these or make the necessary adjustments. The actual placement of this piece of code is irrelevant. Just add it at the very end for clarity's sake. Only make sure you do not accidentally alter the format of your existing settings.

If you are not sure where to place the options, here is a sample of a `_config.yml` file.

```yaml
# Site settings
title: My awesome title
description: My awesome website
baseurl: "" # the subpath of your site, e.g. /blog
url: "http://your-domain.com"

# Collections
collections:
  schemes:
    output: true

defaults:
  - scope:
      type: schemes
    values:
      layout: post

# Build settings
markdown: kramdown
kramdown:
  input: GFM
  syntax_highlighting: rouge
highlighter: rouge
```

By default, Rouge prefixes a `.highlight` CSS class to all the code objects. This is what the Akademos stylesheets will search for. If you have manually changed the prefixed class, you will need to revert to the original.
{: .warn }

### 6. Social menu links

Akademos supports a social links/icons module in the right hand side of the footer section. There are a few steps you will need to follow in order to have it in place.

First, add this line to your `akademos.yml`:

```yml
social: true
```

This will [asynchronously] load the styles of the icons. It will also transform the footer into a two-part structure, consisting of the copyright/attribution section and the social module.

If the value is anything other than `true`, or that line is not added at all, then the footer will only display the copyright/attribution information.

The next step is to specify the social links. As the number of external accounts is indeterminate, a decision has been made to only provide support for the most popular choices, namely, Twitter, Facebook, LinkedIn, Instagram, YouTube, and GitHub.

To add your profiles, you will need to create a new file titled `akademos-social.yml` under your `_data` directory.

In it add the following:

```yml
- name: Twitter
  url: "https://twitter.com/YOUR_USERNAME"

- name: Facebook
  url: "https://www.facebook.com/YOUR_USERNAME"

- name: LinkedIn
  url: "https://www.linkedin.com/YOUR_USERNAME"

- name: GitHub
  url: "https://github.com/YOUR_USERNAME"

- name: Instagram
  url: "https://www.instagram.com/YOUR_USERNAME"

- name: YouTube
  url: "https://www.youtube.com/YOUR_USERNAME"
```

Replace `YOUR_USERNAME` accordingly.

Only add the networks you need (e.g. delete the two lines about YouTube if you do not have a profile there).
{: .info }

Note that the order in which you add the profiles matters. In this example, Twitter will appear first from left to right, followed by Facebook, and so on.

To change the order just cut/paste the two lines that correspond to the network of your preference. Make sure you keep the `name` and `url` in their own line. Also do not remove the hyphen (`-`) to the left of `name`.

### 7. Menu items

There are a number of approaches to adding items to a menu. Akademos makes use of what I have come to consider the best in terms of extensibility and ease of maintenance. Here I describe how to go about it.

Create an `akademos-menu.yml` file under your site's `_data` directory. In it include the name and url of the menu items (internal links can have relative values, such as `/test/` instead of `your-site.com/test/`).

Here is an example:

```yml
- name: About
  url: "/about/"

- name: Contact
  url: "/contact/"

- name: Blog
  url: "/blog/"
```

The above example will create a menu structure like this:

```
├── About     => your-site.com/about/
├── Contact   => your-site.com/contact/
├── Blog      => your-site.com/blog/
```

The `name` key is what determines the label that will show up on the menu. Try to keep it short.

Note that the `name` is only about the menu labels. It is not related to the actual title of the corresponding page. That is defined in the page's front matter.
{: .note}

To direct to your pages, you will need to specify their permanent URL (or just the slug for internal links).

The direct way is to manually define it in the page's YAML front matter using the `permalink` key. Example of my "Contact" page:

```
---
title: "Contact information"
permalink: /contact/
---
```

Once your pages show up in the menu as intended, my recommendation is to proceed with creating a `pages` directory under the root folder where all your page files will be grouped. That will further ease your effort to keep your site organised. This is just optional though.

My kind suggestion is to avoid the methods currently described in the [official Jekyll docs](https://jekyllrb.com/docs/pages/). They are either less flexible than my solution or more complicated when employed at scale.
{: .warn }

Perhaps the only functionality limitation this approach has, is that it requires you to manually reference the `baseurl` in case you have defined it in your site's `_config.yml`.

For example, these demo pages are part of my website `protesilaos.com` and have a `baseurl` value of `akademos`. So when I define this very guide's `permalink` as `/guide/` the actual output is `protesilaos.com/akademos/guide/`.

My hope is that this drawback will not hamper your efforts to organise your menu. I could have specifically configured the menu to automatically prepend the `baseurl` if present, but that would then prevent you from adding links that do not have that value.

By remaining generic, the menu provides you with the flexibility to use a variety of links, including external ones. In exchange, it demands a tiny bit of extra work.

Here is a more varied sample of the `_data/akademos-menu.yml`:

```yml
- name: Author
  url: "/author/" # Relative internal link without baseurl

- name: Guide
  url: "/akademos/guide/" # Relative internal link with baseurl

- name: Contact
  url: "http://www.protesilaos.com/contact/" # Absolute internal link

- name: Wikipedia
  url: "https://www.wikipedia.org/" # External link
```

Try to limit the number of items you add to the menu. Five or six should be okay. Technically, the theme will work with more, but will not look as good.
{: .warn }

### 8. Google analytics

To enable Google Analytics with Akademos, you will need to declare your tracking ID (found in your analytics account) in the `akademos.yml` file, using the `analytics` key.

Example:

```yml
analytics: UA-XXXXXXXX-X
```

If you do not add this option, the Google Analytics tracking code will not be loaded.

## Summary of configurations

All in all, Akademos will make use of a maximum of four additional lines in your `akademos.yml` file under `_data`. These are:

```yml
# Akademos options
authorship: true
social: true
style: flowerbed-dark
analytics: UA-XXXXXXXX-X
```

In addition, the theme expects you to create two files in your `_data` directory. These are the `akademos-social.yml` and `akademos-menu.yml`. They provide the structured data necessary for constructing the theme's social links module and header menu respectively. In the absence of those files, these parts will not be displayed.

## Homepage

Akademos is packaged with an `index.html` file. It is what determines the structure and styles of your homepage. That file is slightly different than this [demo's index page](/akademos/). It lacks the module that displays the section title/subtitle.

If you wish to replicate this demo's homepage, create an `index.html` file under the root directory and include the following:

```html
{% raw %}---
title: "My homepage title"
subtitle: "My homepage subtitle"
layout: page
---

<div class="home-loop">
  <ul>
    {% for post in site.posts limit:10 %}
      <li class="clearfix">
        <a href="{{ post.url | prepend: site.baseurl }}">
          {{ post.title }}
        </a>
        <span class="post-meta">
          {{ post.date | date: '%b %d, %Y' }}
        </span>
      </li>
    {% endfor %}
  </ul>
</div>{% endraw %}
```

Then modify the values for the `title` and `subtitle` keys (delete the subtitle line if not needed).

The above code limits the list output to up to 10 items. This is achieved via the `limit:10` filter in the `{% raw %}{% for post in site.posts limit:10 %}{% endraw %}` line. Change the number if you wish, or remove the `limit:10` filter altogether.
{: .note }

## External resources

Akademos makes use of [loadCSS](https://github.com/filamentgroup/loadCSS) to asynchronously implement the [Google Fonts](https://fonts.google.com) and [Font Awesome](http://fontawesome.io/) icon set for the social media module.

The icons will be loaded only if the `social: true` option is included (described in the [social menu links](#social-menu-links) section).

The font families are *Open Sans* and *Source Code Pro*.

LoadCSS is copyright (c) 2014 Filament Group under the terms of the MIT License.  
Font Awesome is open source. See [its license structure](http://fontawesome.io/license/).  
The Google Fonts in use are open sourced under the [Open Font License](http://scripts.sil.org/cms/scripts/page.php?site_id=nrsi&id=OFL_web).
{: .info }

## Contributions and requests

I am looking forward to receiving your suggestions, especially as concerns the optimisation of the existing codebase.

In terms of features, this theme is the finished article. Any additions I may make will only iterate on existing functionality or presentation. The exception would be to address some serious omission in the original version.

Useful links:

- [Akademos GitHub repo](https://github.com/protesilaos/akademos)
- [Contact information](http://www.protesilaos.com/contact/) of Protesilaos Stavrou

## License

Akademos is Copyright (c) 2016 Protesilaos Stavrou. It is made available as open source under the terms of the [MIT License](http://opensource.org/licenses/MIT).

[^Prot16Note]: The colour schemes are part of my [Prot16 project](/schemes/). It is a collection of themes that were originally designed for the purposes of highlighting code syntax.
